feat: context propagation (#227)
open-feature/spec: specification/sections/03-evaluation-context.md

##### Conditional Requirement 3.2.2.4

> The API **MUST** have a mechanism to manage `evaluation context` for an associated name.

In the static-context paradigm, it must be possible to create and remove provider-specific context.
See [setting a provider](./01-flag-evaluation.md#setting-a-provider) for details.

#### Requirement 3.2.3

> > Evaluation context **MUST** be merged in the order: API (global; lowest precedence) -> transaction -> client -> invocation -> before hooks (highest precedence), with duplicate values being overwritten.

Reviewer: Transaction context is only available when using the dynamic context paradigm but it's nice to have this be a single requirement. Perhaps we could explicitly clarify this in the non-normative section?

Reviewer: I think it's fine to leave it but I would recommend adding a short explanation. FYI @toddbaert

Author: I added a note to this.

##### Conditional Requirement 3.2.2.4

> The API **MUST** have a mechanism to manage `evaluation context` for an associated name.

In the static-context paradigm, it must be possible to create and remove provider-specific context.
See [setting a provider](./01-flag-evaluation.md#setting-a-provider) for details.

#### Requirement 3.2.3

> [!NOTE]

> > This describes the precedence of all `evaluation context` variants. Depending on the `paradigm`, not all variants might be available in an `SDK` implementation.

Author: So this would just mean, that we remove the `>` and note from it right?

> > This describes the precedence of all `evaluation context` variants. Depending on the `paradigm`, not all variants might be available in an `SDK` implementation.

Reviewer 2: Yes, and move it below.

> When the `evaluation context` for a specific provider is set, the `on context changed` handler **MUST** only run on the associated provider.

The SDK implementation must run the `on context changed` handler only on the provider that is scoped to the mutated `evaluation context`.

### 3.3 Context Propagation

[![experimental](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Status&message=experimental&color=orange)](https://github.com/open-feature/spec/tree/main/specification#experimental)

#### Condition 3.3.1

> The implementation uses the dynamic-context paradigm.

see: [dynamic-context paradigm](../glossary.md#dynamic-context-paradigm)

##### Conditional Requirement 3.3.1.1

> The API **MUST** have a method for setting a `transaction context propagator`.

If there already is a `transaction context propagator`, it is replaced with the new one. 

##### Conditional Requirement 3.3.1.2

> The API **MUST** have a method for setting the `evaluation context` of the `transaction context propagator`.

> If a `transaction context propagator` is set, this `evaluation context` must be supplied to it and so will be available during the current transaction.

Reviewer: Please explicitly state that setting evaluation context before a transaction context propagator has been configured will no op.

Author: Did so @beeme1mr.

This method can e.g. be used in a request handler to add request specific information to the `evaluation context`.

##### Conditional Requirement 3.3.1.3

> A `transaction context propagator` **MUST** have a method for setting the `evaluation context` of the current transaction.

A `transaction context propagator` is responsible for persisting context for the duration of a single transaction.

> Typically, a transaction context propagator will propagate the context using a language-specific carrier such as [`ThreadLocal` (Java)](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/ThreadLocal.html), [`async hooks` (Node.js)](https://nodejs.org/api/async_hooks.html), [`Context` (Go)](https://pkg.go.dev/context) or another similar mechanism.

Reviewer: Please add a code example.

Reviewer 3: hi @lukas-reining,
if we look on real use-case consumer example in high level:

```
public isFeatureEnabled(HttpRequest request, String feature) {
        session = getSession(request);
        user = getUser(session);
        email = getEmail(request, session, user);
        evaluationContextMap.put(USER_EMAIL_PROPERTY, email);
        value = OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().getClient().getBooleanValue(key, defaultValue, evaluationContext);
```

how will this spec change will handle this use case ?
Can the OpenFeature provider example treat this use case ?
Can you also provide high-level code example of consumer code that can match the consumer code example ?
Thanks

Author: What do you mean by this @liran2000? I think I do not really get the question.
In this case it seems that the feature flag is evaluated directly in the request handler is that right? The context propagation is meant for the case where you have information available at one place and want to have it available in all other places in this transaction. Like for example propagating a header value for use in repository (even if you may would not like to do this)

Reviewer: @liran2000 here's an example in the OpenFeature playground app showing transaction context in action.

https://github.com/open-feature/playground/blob/main/packages/app/src/app/transaction-context.middleware.ts

The advantage is that you can set requested scoped context like a user email address in middleware and have it automatically be included during flag evaluation.

Reviewer 4: @liran2000 this is how I see context propagation with regard to your example,

consider setting user email at the request handler implementation in Javaish  pseudocode,

```
    public void handleRequest(HttpRequest request){
        session = getSession(request);
        user = getUser(session);
        email = getEmail(request, session, user);

        evaluationContextMap.put(USER_EMAIL email);

        // set transaction context
        OpenFeatureAPI.setTransactionContext(new ImmutableContext(evaluationContextMap))
      
        .... rest of the logic
    }
 ```
 
 Once the context is set, any feature flag evaluation inside the current transaction will observe the `USER_EMAIL` property and merge it with other contexts (ex:- evaluation invocation context).
 
 For example, your example reduced to one line as email is already set in context,
 
 ```
  public isFeatureEnabled(HttpRequest request, String feature) { 
       ....
        OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().getClient().getBooleanValue(key, defaultValue, invocationCtx);
    }
```

Reviewer 3: Thank you all

Reviewer: Please resolve this thread once you've had a chance to add a code snippet.

Author: added an example

The SDK implementation must run the `on context changed` handler only on the provider that is scoped to the mutated `evaluation context`.

### 3.3 Context Propagation

[![experimental](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Status&message=experimental&color=orange)](https://github.com/open-feature/spec/tree/main/specification#experimental)

#### Condition 3.3.1

> The implementation uses the dynamic-context paradigm.

see: [dynamic-context paradigm](../glossary.md#dynamic-context-paradigm)

##### Conditional Requirement 3.3.1.1

> The API **MUST** have a method for setting a `transaction context propagator`.

If there already is a `transaction context propagator`, it is replaced with the new one. 

##### Conditional Requirement 3.3.1.2

> The API **MUST** have a method for setting the `evaluation context` of the `transaction context propagator`.

If a `transaction context propagator` is set, this `evaluation context` must be supplied to it and so will be available during the current transaction.
If no `transaction context propagator` is set, this `evaluation context` is not used for evaluations.

> This method can e.g. be used in a request handler to add request specific information to the `evaluation context`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method can e.g. be used in a request handler to add request-specific information to the `evaluation context`.
```

    const ip = res.headers.get("X-Forwarded-For")
    OpenFeature.setTransactionContext({ targetingKey: req.user.id, ipAddress: ip }, () => {
        // The transaction context is used in any flag evaluation throughout the whole call chain of next 
        next();
    });
})
```

#### Condition 3.3.1

> The implementation uses the dynamic-context paradigm.

see: [dynamic-context paradigm](../glossary.md#dynamic-context-paradigm)

##### Conditional Requirement 3.3.1.1

> The API **MUST** have a method for setting a `transaction context propagator`.

If there already is a `transaction context propagator`, it is replaced with the new one. 

##### Conditional Requirement 3.3.1.2

> The API **MUST** have a method for setting the `evaluation context` of the `transaction context propagator` for the current transaction.

If a `transaction context propagator` is set, the SDK will call the [method defined in 3.3.1.3](#conditional-requirement-3313) with this `evaluation context` and so this `evaluation context` will be available during the current transaction.
If no `transaction context propagator` is set, this `evaluation context` is not used for evaluations.

> This method can e.g. be used in a request handler to add request-specific information to the `evaluation context`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This method can be used in a request handler to add request-specific information to the `evaluation context`.
```

Author: Without the e.g it feels like request handlers are the only intended use case to me @Kavindu-Dodan, but I am not sure how to state it differently.

Reviewer 4: ohh I thought this was a mistake. It was odd to see e.g in a sentence, may be we can expand this to something like 

```suggestion
This method then can be used for example in a request handler to add request-specific information to the `evaluation context`.
```

##### Conditional Requirement 3.3.1.3

> A `transaction context propagator` **MUST** have a method for setting the `evaluation context` of the current transaction.

A `transaction context propagator` is responsible for persisting context for the duration of a single transaction.
Typically, a transaction context propagator will propagate the context using a language-specific carrier such as [ThreadLocal (Java)](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/ThreadLocal.html), [async hooks (Node.js)](https://nodejs.org/api/async_hooks.html), [Context (Go)](https://pkg.go.dev/context) or another similar mechanism.

##### Conditional Requirement 3.3.1.4

> A `transaction context propagator` **MUST** have a method for getting the `evaluation context` of the current transaction.

This will be used by the SDK implementation when merging the context for evaluating a feature flag.

#### Condition 3.3.2

> The implementation uses the static-context paradigm.

see: [static-context paradigm](../glossary.md#static-context-paradigm)

##### Conditional Requirement 3.3.2.1

> The API **MUST NOT** have a method for setting a `transaction context propagator`.

> In the static-context paradigm, context is global, so there should not be different context between transactions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the static-context paradigm, context is global, so there must not be different contexts between transactions.
```

> When the `evaluation context` for a specific provider is set, the `on context changed` handler **MUST** only run on the associated provider.

The SDK implementation must run the `on context changed` handler only on the provider that is scoped to the mutated `evaluation context`.

### 3.3 Context Propagation

[![experimental](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Status&message=experimental&color=orange)](https://github.com/open-feature/spec/tree/main/specification#experimental)

#### Condition 3.3.1

> The implementation uses the dynamic-context paradigm.

see: [dynamic-context paradigm](../glossary.md#dynamic-context-paradigm)

##### Conditional Requirement 3.3.1.1

> The API **MUST** have a method for setting a `transaction context propagator`.

If there already is a `transaction context propagator`, it is replaced with the new one. 

##### Conditional Requirement 3.3.1.2

> > The API **MUST** have a method for setting the `evaluation context` of the `transaction context propagator`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> The API **MUST** have a method for setting the `evaluation context` of the `transaction context propagator` for the current transaction.
```

If a `transaction context propagator` is set, this `evaluation context` must be supplied to it and so will be available during the current transaction.
If no `transaction context propagator` is set, this `evaluation context` is not used for evaluations.

> This method can e.g. be used in a request handler to add request-specific information to the `evaluation context`.

Reviewer 2: I think it would help with clarity if this this would somehow make it obvious that it will result in the function described in 3.3.1.3 being called.

The following shows a possible TypeScript implementation using [AsyncLocalStorage (async_hooks)](https://nodejs.org/api/async_context.html): 

```typescript
export class AsyncLocalStorageTransactionContext implements TransactionContextPropagator {
    private asyncLocalStorage = new AsyncLocalStorage<EvaluationContext>();

    getTransactionContext(): EvaluationContext {
        return this.asyncLocalStorage.getStore() ?? {};
    }
    setTransactionContext(context: EvaluationContext, callback: () => void): void {
        this.asyncLocalStorage.run(context, callback);
    }
}

/**
 * This example is based on an express middleware.
 */
app.use((req: Request, res: Response, next: NextFunction) => {
    const ip = res.headers.get("X-Forwarded-For")
    OpenFeature.setTransactionContext({ targetingKey: req.user.id, ipAddress: ip }, () => {
        // The transaction context is used in any flag evaluation throughout the whole call chain of next 
        next();
    });

> })

Reviewer 2: I would consider moving some of this up to the intro section (3.3) so people can understand the "big picture" before they start reading the requirements. I'll leave it to you though to decide if this works better.

```

##### Conditional Requirement 3.3.1.4

> A `transaction context propagator` **MUST** have a method for getting the `evaluation context` of the current transaction.

> This must be used by the SDK implementation when merging the context for evaluating a feature flag.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will be used by the SDK implementation when merging the context for evaluating a feature flag.
```

Try to avoid RFC2119 keywords in non-normative sections, where possible.

I would add an equivalent sentence in 3.3.1.3, something like this "This must be used by the SDK when setting the context for a transaction"
